I'm Wesley Morris and this is
Cannonball.
[Music]
When something big happens in this
country, something that feels important
in terms of who we are, I I always need
some time to sit with it and to think
about how it fits into the larger story
of this country. Yes. But also its
history.
And right now, what's happening is a
battle over our story itself. Since
January, this effort's been underway to
dismantle the thorny, complicated
version of that story, to sanitize it.
Basically, our government prefers a
brighter, cleaner, more glorious story.
And so, I've needed some time to
understand what that's all about. Is
this widescale dismantling of the
messier, more uncomfortable version has
been playing out. basically a lot of it
around our cultural institutions. And
what I keep thinking about is this one
afternoon 6 years ago. It was a gray day
in February. I definitely remember that
on the third floor of the New York Times
building in a conference room and an
all-star group of journalists, scholars,
New York Times magazine staff folks had
come together to brainstorm about an
idea that our colleague Nicole Hannah
Jones had to commemorate the 400th
anniversary of the arrival of the first
enslaved Africans on what is now North
American soil. Now, I can't remember if
the 1619 project was an official name,
but there must have been about 40 of us
in that room that day. And the exercise
was to identify practices and ideas that
exist in the present whose roots go back
to American enslavement. And
it was just astonishing to see the ideas
fly up on that whiteboard. Was sugar an
even cashier crop than cotton? Did
somebody just mention traffic and urban
sprawl? Democracy?
Jesus Christ.
I mean, it was um it was distressing, I
must say, but it was also exhilarating.
This brilliant group of thinkers coming
together around this shared project,
making these connections, these vital
connections between our lives today,
right here in the present, and our
country's origins. And readers seemed
shocked to have it, but also
gratified for all this journalism,
scholarship, art, history feeling. The
project's timing seemed pretty perfect,
too. I mean, it dropped at this moment
when Americans were newly interested in
these ideas around race and their pop
music, race in their horror movies. Get
Out finally found permanent metaphors
for northern white liberal racism. They
said it couldn't be done, but Jordan
Peele did it. Black Panther, imagine
this magnanimous African kingdom that
vowed to do better by Oakland than
California had. And both those movies
were best picture nominees. And that
that's not nothing. I can't remember the
last time two movies about black people
were competing for the same Oscar.
Atlanta, that was the coolest show on
TV. This is America. This is America.
>> Not the coolest song on the radio, but
it did debut at the top of the Billboard
Hot 100 and win Childish Gambino the
Grammys for Record and Song of the Year.
And I think what's happening now, I
mean, it's basically a backlash to that
period. The National Museum of African
American History and Culture, man, that
place would be so much better if, for
instance, it just didn't have so much
slavery in it. The Kennedy Center, that
place would be a lot more legit if it
just banned the drag queens among us
from performing there. Any policy or
program that involves just about any
non-white, non-heterero, non-sis
identity has now been rebranded as woke.
At our museums, yeah, but also in our
workplaces, at our colleges and
universities, in our public school
systems, at our national parks,
wherever. And there's an argument to be
made that what started in that room 6
years ago, what I experienced as a
simple but profound procedure of laying
out, ruminating on American history,
this work of explanatory journalism that
helped bring about this backlash, helped
bring Donald Trump and the MAGAverse
back into power. And so I wanted to sit
down with Nicole Hannah Jones and hear
how how she'd been feeling about this
moment. And is what I'm even supposing
true?
Nicole, welcome to Cannonball. Hey
Wesley.
>> Um,
does my recollection of that afternoon
in February 2019 sound right to you?
>> Truncated? Yes.
>> What's the long version?
>> We don't need to hear the long version,
but but yes. I mean, it wasn't called
the 1619 project. Uh, originally my idea
was to call it the 400, but yeah, it was
a colossal nerdfest. It was like uh
>> it was that was the thing. It was really
Yeah,
>> it was really nerdy.
>> It was a ner It was my my blurred my
black nerd dream. um in that all of
these scholars whose work I had read
through the years um I brought them into
this space at the times along with so
many of the amazing writers who worked
with us at the magazine and at the
newspaper and we just had a big
brainstorming session and so many of the
ideas that ultimately made the project
came out of that session and and the
prompt if you remember was very simple
that on the 400th anniversary of
American slavery we wanted to come up
with a collection of essays that were
arguing arguing not about the past but
about today and saying that so much of
our society was based in slavery and yet
we didn't know it. And so kind of the
key was the connections had to be
surprising. So that's how you get an
idea like traffic because we didn't want
to tell the the story of the legacy of
slavery that everyone knew. We wanted to
show that almost anything that you could
see in our society I could trace back to
slavery in some way. And I have played
that as a parlor game and I actually can
trace anything
>> anything like I mean you and I have not
played this. I mean I do remember trying
to imagine what people were going to
think right like my bank my in like the
place where my money is currently right
now the place I do investments was also
involved in the slave trade. Well of
course it was. If it was there then and
is here now then the answer is yes. But
I also remember
that, you know, you and I have talked
about this not infrequently,
but there was that day that we closed
the issue and I remember
I had to catch a train and you stayed
later. You stayed till the bitter end
and I left at about 2 pm and
we hugged each other
>> and it was
I don't know I felt like that hug was
about a lot of things but one of them
was I felt like
something was going to change and I
don't know what that really was going to
be. Mhm.
>> What was that about for you, do you
think?
>> Because we got really emotional.
>> Yes.
>> And I don't think it was stress. I mean,
it wasn't for me.
>> It was definitely
>> I mean, part of it
>> partially stress for me because Well,
one I I'm curious about whether you
really felt at that time something was
going to change or if now that's how you
think you felt looking back. So, I want
to come back to that. Um
>> Okay. Cuz I've been thinking about what
I meant by that, too.
>> Yeah. because I mean it's been 5 years
of beyond anything obviously any of us
could have imagined the project would
become and so sometimes I I catch myself
remembering a feeling that I don't think
I had back then um but that the
experience now
>> causes me to place upon that moment I
was exhausted
>> I you know I was the one who conceived
of the project literally did nothing
else um from the moment I pitched the
project until it published. Read every
word multiple times. So you were
involved in every image multiple times.
And what I'm remembering is Dean Bake,
who was the first black editor of the
Times, um is the one who hired me as
well as you.
>> We put up all the pages of the magazine
on that conference room wall and we
bring him in to look at it and I come
and get you before that.
>> Yeah. I This is what I also
>> This is what you're remembering. And I
bring you into that room where we have
all the images, all the words. And I
remember we hug each other and we just
are sobbing. Like both of us are
literally sobbing. And for me in that
moment, it was like we [__] did it.
>> Like this thing, which I have I always
say is the blackest thing the New York
Times has ever ever published,
>> which is just true. But this thing that
was like unflinching and we had, you
know, at this most elite white
journalism organization had managed to
produce this thing that felt so true. So
to see it all there just felt emotional
like like I felt
I was called like I was here to do this
thing and had somehow managed uh with
this amazing team of ours um to bring it
into the world. So that it was both
exhaustion, gratitude, disbelief like we
we we had made this thing and now it was
going to go out into the world. And once
you release it, you have no idea what
happens to it once it goes out into the
world. So it's also this amazingly like
pure moment of like hope and
anticipation
of this thing. Um and then everything
happens after that.
>> I think part of that day for me was you
were right. You're right. I probably was
I'm probably displacing something onto
that moment, but I also had the sense
that I just really felt like this was
going to matter in some way. I just
couldn't have said how. I definitely
felt that. On some level, like do you
remember when you felt like you could
see something happening?
>> Um, yeah. I mean, I didn't have to wait
long. So, it published online, I think
that Wednesday, and then there were a
bunch of people who knew just online.
Social was different back then. So, that
it was coming out um that Sunday. And
the day of publication, you know, I I
couldn't sleep. I was like an anxious
mess. Mostly because I was like, my god,
like
>> all of these resources that have gone
into this thing and it's so hard to keep
anyone's attention. I just didn't know
if anyone, you know, would it would
people read it? Would people would it be
anything? And so I'm like on social. I I
really haven't slept. And I just start
seeing these stories of people who were
talking about, oh, I I went to like five
stores trying to find
>> Yeah.
>> the issue. And people were starting to
post like like videos like I finally got
one. And I was like, it's a magazine.
Like that's amazing. It's a newspaper.
And then people were getting mad because
people had stolen the magazine out of
their paper that was on their steps. And
I was like, oh my god. like this is a a
print publication about slavery and
people are excitedly trying to find it
and like uh traveling out of town to
grab a copy and people were wanting to
buy multiple copies. So that first
edition like sold out. They they did
like a extra run of I remember the
copies of the magazine and then you
started seeing
>> um people were holding events like even
the day it came out I was dropping by
people's parties
>> where they were like I was like oh oh
you're doing something down in lower
Manhattan I'll be there. I made like
five stops into like people's events
around like their organic events around
this piece and people who didn't know it
was coming like going in their newspaper
that day and seeing this thing that they
never ever thought that they would see
in the New York Times. And then it just
went wild like people were baking 1619
cookies. Classroom teachers were
decorating their classrooms with the
images from the newspaper, the the pull
out. people wanted to teach it briefly.
Uh it was an amazing
moment where you realized you could
produce something that was really hard,
really challenging, lots of words and
people wanted to engage with it and and
it was this period I think I remember in
at that time so this is the end of uh
Trump's first term
>> and people were wanting to really try to
grapple with you know how did the
country that elects Obama twice ICE
elect Donald Trump. And I think the
power of it was I do think timing
mattered.
>> I think had the project come out under
Obama when people wanted to believe we
were post-racial, there wouldn't have
been that same sort of searching. And uh
this is before we see George Floyd. This
is before COVID. It's those few brief
months. And there is like this sense
that like black creative culture was the
center of the universe. It it felt like
a renaissance. I remember us talking
about like everybody dressed up and went
to see
>> Black Panther, right? And it it felt
like this moment of possibility of
creative power. Um
>> but damn, it was brief.
>> When did it feel like things had changed
or were changing? So when the project
first came out, there was kind of your
normal conservative outrage. I think N
Gingri called it trash or something like
that. And that that was expected and
then it it sort of went away and um the
project became, as you know, this
cultural phenomenon that you dream of as
a journalist that you can produce.
>> You never even dream. You don't even
dream that big. you know, you hope that
something has uh legs for a week
>> would be like amazing in in our media
ecosystem. But then I remember
this little tiny group interviewed these
um historians
and some of them very very eminent is
historians and they were upset that this
project talked so much about race when
they think the primary you know obstacle
in the United States is class then it
kind of caught wind. Okay, now we're
rehashing my scab. I don't want to you
don't have to get into all of this, but
I'm actually really just curious about
what the complaint was like just writ
large that the project that missed the
point of what America was actually about
that it was about this one thing in this
case being class versus what it meant to
enslave. So, so look, it it was
provocative, right? Like we're saying,
what if we told you the origin of the
United States is not 1776, right? that
if you want to understand America, you
can't begin with ideas of liberty. You
have to begin with the practice of
slavery. Of course, it no longer treated
our founding as divine
>> and our founders as demiggods, but
actually says slavery was a big deal.
>> Mhm.
>> And as much as you want to act like it
was an asterisk, it was actually central
to everything about our country. Now, I
think it's provocative, but also true. I
think it's true enough to seem not as
provocative as the people who received
it as provocative received it is.
>> And it actually wasn't really
provocative. So, you know, historian
Edmund Morgan had made, you know, in
America, slavery and freedom begin at
the same time. Except what was
provocative was it was in the New York
Times and it had gotten so popular. So,
if we think about the way most people
learn history and American mythology, it
is through popular culture. Mhm.
>> And so you could have these same
arguments in these dry history books on
a shelf and no one cares. But when it is
in the New York Times and suddenly all
of these regular people are talking
about it, there were people who didn't
like that. I mean it was certainly this
sense of like gatekeeping like who are
they to try to tell us the story of
America? And if we think about that
period, it was a warning sign. This is
what I was going to ask you. This
wrestling over who gets to define who we
are as Americans, what were we founded
upon, what is our primary identity? That
was a an inkling of of what was to come.
I think that this is a really
fascinating period for not simply race,
but the context of race in history. And
we are talking about this thing coming
out. The pandemic happens. You have that
really surreal period in which Ahmad
Arbury is killed. We find out that Ahmad
Arbory had been killed. Bana Taylor's
been killed. George Floyd's been killed.
And it just seemed like the the the ways
in which the the project was thinking
about the present with respect to the
past, people were ready to receive and
enact. I don't know. What was 2020 like
in your understanding of how your work
functions independent of you? What was
that period like?
>> Why are you smiling?
>> Well, I'm just thinking about what my
Twitter account was like.
>> What was your Twitter account like? very
messy
>> from you or to you?
>> Both.
>> Both. I mean, when I when I think about
um
what happens in uh 2019 or 2020, the end
of 2019 before we're going into the
pandemic before we all, you know,
because we are on lockdown, like
collectively watch the murder of George
Floyd on our on our televisions. What
was happening was people were responding
to the 1619 project, but also there were
there were a lot of great work around
this history's racial past that was
coming out and again like in popular
culture and a way of of having power of
of of like blockbuster narrative uh that
we didn't have before. I'm thinking
about, you know, the Obama portrait.
Just so much, right? That was that was
that was
>> You mean the WY portrait of Obama? Yeah.
Amy Char and doing Michelle Obama,
>> right? Yeah.
>> So, I kept hearing from people in anger
like how didn't we know this, right? So
people would be reading 1619 or
listening to the podcast and just like
angry that this whole history existed
that seemed to explain America a lot
more than the history that been taught
and wanting to know like how didn't we
know this? Again, we didn't create new
history, right? We just put it in a form
for for popular um consumption and also
made it relate to their lives today. And
so when George Floyd happens, people are
making those connections.
>> They're saying, "Take it down. Take it
down."
>> People are saying, "Why? Why are we Why
have we allowed these Confederate
monuments to stand?"
>> You can see it right now. It has fallen.
There it is. Let's go.
>> You're seeing people spray painting 1619
on Confederate monuments and other, you
know, monuments to people who were
openly racist. And um there's this
moment, we briefly called that period
the reckoning. And the reckoning was not
just our collective witness of what
happened to George Floyd, but a larger
reckoning about who we really are and
what we owe uh to descendants of slavery
and other marginalized people. But this
is also happening in this moment of like
profound uh demographic shift every day,
you know, or not, let me not be
hyperbolic, but frequently enough, we
would see, you know, news stories about
how white people were going to become
the minority by 2040.
>> Yes.
>> Now, that's not actually true, but we're
we're projecting this out. And Obama
wins twice with a minority of the white
vote. And so there's this sense that you
can elect a black man to the presidency
and most white people don't have to vote
for him. And our country is becoming
less and less white. And now we're also
seeing black people at the New York
Times who can create, you know, this
project take over an entire issue of a
magazine and take over the newspaper and
do a podcast. And so you I start to see
this response that isn't just about what
was created, you know, that this was a
newspaper article or a newspaper
project. It was a response that this was
a war.
>> Well, what is happening is that a group
of blacks have gotten together and they
have hijacked the rich legacy of the
civil rights movement.
>> The the the basic premise of the 1619
project having read the entire thing was
that American history was founded in
evil and and basically that evil has
infused the entire body politic and
every aspect of American life.
>> It wants to wake you up to the fact that
your the entire America that you thought
you knew was a lie. That bowl of cereal
you ate this morning. Evil because it
has sugar in it. Sugar was a slave crop.
Lack of universal health care because of
slavery. Overcrowded prisons. Low
minimum wage. White artists stealing
black music.
>> The 1619 project is a radical work of
historical revisionism aiming to
indoctrinate our kids to hate America.
>> Right. So Tom Cotton and Mitch McConnell
introduced the Saving America History
Act. They introduced actual legislation
to keep the project from being taught in
the classroom. Donald Trump, the
president of the United States, is
talking about 1619, you know, that this
this could like collapse American
empire. The 1619 project and the crusade
against American history is toxic
propaganda,
ideological poison that if not removed
will dissolve the civic bonds that tie
us together
will destroy our country.
>> I was like, damn, I'm a bad bee if I can
do that. But you know, but but there is
serious now cultural power on the other
side trying to wrestle with this
narrative. Donald Trump creates the 1776
commission.
>> Today, I'm also pleased to announce that
I will soon sign an executive order
establishing a national commission to
promote patriotic education.
It will be called the 1776
Commission.
So you you start to see that there is
this going to be this tremendous push
back against it. And for me personally
again we're in co it is.
>> So this is back to your Twitter feed.
>> We're at home.
>> Yeah. Mhm.
>> And now you know people smell blood and
so everyone is coming not just at the
project but at me. And I
this was not just you know uh an
assignment for me like this work was
deeply personal. We we know everything
that went into it. How much care was
taken and so I took it personally and I
have all the time in the world because
it's the pandemic. So 2020 for many
reasons was the darkest year of my
career. Mhm.
>> I mean, I'm hearing you talk about the
way people were coming for you, but I
also wonder if I mean, because you had
to pull yourself out of it.
And what did what did getting past that
period look like? Like I mean, it's a
mess on your end. Um,
is what you said, but how were you
cleaning up the mess or like what did it
mean to sit in that for a second? Yeah,
I I had to um
I mean one you're like you have helped
create something that is deemed so
dangerous that all of this political
power I'm talking about you know the
most powerful men in the world tweeting
about 1619 like you realize that that
you have produced something that has
shaken
>> like power itself
>> and that I don't, you know, I I don't
have to defend that. I had to understand
and and let me be clear there. There was
certainly valid critique of the 1619
project. I I don't I've never written
anything that was above critique and
I've never written anything or done
anything that I thought was perfect. But
I talk about how I had a very good
friend of mine, a writer friend, who
said like, "Why are you out here street
fighting with these people in these
Twitter streets? the fact that you have
all of these people trying to discredit
this work means it stands. It's not even
yours anymore. And he said, "You don't
have the right to do anything that
discredits this work because it doesn't
even belong to you." And he tells me
that I am the only one at this point who
can discredit it.
>> That nothing that they're doing can. And
that was the thing out of everything.
You know, it was a lot of people telling
me put the phone down, right? I mean,
>> but that was the thing because I
realized it wasn't mine anymore. And he
was right. And
>> the best way to respond to what was
coming was not to respond at all.
>> Right. Cuz you were going
account to account to account.
>> You could have five followers
>> to asking.
>> I had time
>> asking these people to account for
themselves.
>> Yes.
>> I mean,
>> look, okay, you know this though, it's
like I I have been studying this history
since I was 15 years old.
>> This is Yes.
>> Mhm. And so it is the hardest thing in
the world that you have spent your
lifetime studying something. I was the
face of the project, but most of the
people who wrote the project were not
me, right? So you're they're not coming
after any of these historians. They're
not coming after these other writers.
Just me.
>> No, it was you.
>> And but it's also someone who hasn't
spent 5 seconds on this,
>> who feels that they can tell you you got
this wrong. You don't know what you're
talking about. And so that restraint
I didn't have. have I'm an Aries. I'm an
Aries. I don't I don't have restraint. I
had to learn this in my maturity
>> over the past 5 years. That's why I said
I've grown. But also just realizing my
reacting to people who were clearly just
trying to bait me into reacting where
when I responded, they got attention,
but I don't need to respond because the
project is what it is. That's what I
learned uh over that summer. Um and uh
it was transformative in how I
understood both what the project was and
what it meant to the world but also how
to uh move in silence. I also felt like
in addition to how hard that period was
personally, there was just upheaval
everywhere. And I remember during 2020
feeling like
this really unprecedented thing was
happening, right? We're talking about
the ways in which this project got so
much bigger than you, in many ways,
bigger than the institution that
releases it. But
this was also this wild period in which
I mean we start capitalizing black.
>> Yeah.
>> Every corporation in America is doing
some version of a kind of atonement.
It's not reparative, but it's like
reparations flavored, right? Like it's
really light, but but it's it's
interesting to hear language put to
something that had never been put to
Absolutely. put put before. you know,
the monuments being challenged and
collapsed. I mean, these were things, by
the way, that I mean, I don't know about
you, nobody called me and asked. Like,
these were these were changes and
decisions that were being made that the
institutions, including this one where
we work at the New York Times, were just
deciding it was time to make these
changes. And I felt like
a simultaneous participant in that
moment and a bystander to a history that
involved me in some way.
>> And some of it was great. I think that
some of it was a kind of overcorrection.
And I'm curious like on the other side
of this this Twitter mess that you you
know at at what you would say is one of
your low moments there's also there's
some aspect in which the work you've
been doing is seeing this new light of
day.
>> Mhm.
>> And what does that feel like
>> man? So on the one hand it was like um
the 1619 project provided the lexicon
for that summer of protest that it gave
people a basis like the a an ability to
to push back against this narrative that
so often came from you know white
Americans tend to view for instance a
George Floyd moment as like a bad apple
incident. Of course, black people see it
as part of this long history and part of
a a system. And you saw
large numbers of white Americans who
were now making a structural critique.
So I of course obsessed over the summer
of 2020 and I I spent a lot of time
looking at polling data and that was the
first time that a majority of white
Americans supported Black Lives Matter.
um they had never seen a majority of
them supporting and so you were seeing
like these connections being made you
know I wrote about this like NASCAR was
like oh maybe we shouldn't fly the
Confederate flag
>> right so it was this period where people
were putting together an understanding
of their America and these systems in a
way that we hadn't seen before now of
course you said overcorrection I I I I
wouldn't use that word
>> okay but there are like these zones in
which
I feel like
>> I think there might have been a better
solution than what was than what was
come up with course. That's that's all I
need
>> because it it it is necessarily was
going to be messy that people who had
felt and and I feel this around um the
the issue of transamericans as well,
right? that people who had been
completely silenced or felt silenced or
felt that they they had to stuff down
how they felt in that moment when you've
been silenced maybe you get a little too
loud or your voice is louder than you
would have wanted it to. Right? So I I
think we all those of us who work in
this area and study history, we all know
that uh the normative state of America
is regression. Mhm. Mhm.
>> Our our mythology tells us the normative
state of America is progress. So I I I
talk about this like with the Supreme
Court. We all pretend the Warren Court,
right,
>> is the apotheiois of the court.
>> It's not right.
>> Warren Court was a blip, right?
>> Most of the court is the court that we
have now or the court of pie v Fergus,
right? Like that that was the the court
and and this is normative America. So,
we all knew the backlash was coming and
so people considered that to be an
overcorrection, but I think it really
was a moment of of people who have had
to be, you know, suppressed finally
having a moment where they felt they
could push and just feeling we better
push really hard. There's not going to
be a long time of this. And uh most of
what happened in 2020 was performative,
right? Yes, there there was no
reparations, like none of those kind of
societal or structural things that
people were asking for. We got symbolic
victories and now we're being met with
structural resistance.
>> I mean, I was struck by
what happened in 2020 in response to the
project. I'm thinking about it right
now, which is that there is a real fear
of what happens when
people find out
It's the education that scares people.
>> Oh, absolutely. Yeah. I mean, listen,
these are the folks who
said they were freeth thinkers, right?
Who said that um people were being
oppressed on college campuses for their
ideological viewpoint that we needed an
intervention to allow free speech.
>> That that that was the issue was the
illiberal left was suppressing speech.
And now we are in a moment of tremendous
state power that is literally taking
books off the shelves telling historic
sites and history museums what they can
include and what they can't asking
everyday Americans through a QR code to
report if they go to a historic site and
it doesn't um venerate
>> Americans and by Americans we know they
mean white Americans. But I I think that
that's what makes this period so
tremendously dangerous
>> is that a truly free society and and and
and too often, you know, even our
colleagues in the industry kind of
treated college students who might
protest a speaker who they thought was
repugnant as equivalent to the state
using its power
>> to dictate and make illegal discussing
certain things, certain topics. I mean,
>> the DEI infrastructure did arise out of
2020, right? Um, it proliferated out of
2020 and I have been a critic of it
because I always felt it was
performative and now I have to defend it
because they are
>> Nicole, you're like in my brain,
>> right? using it to dismantle not just
poor diversity training or mandated
diversity training, but um to dismantle
civil rights and to dismantle a common
belief that multiculturalism is good. Y
>> that we should try to make a society
more equitable, that it's actually not
beneficial in a democracy to have people
of color excluded from entire
professions and uh not able to go to
elite colleges and and they have
actually been able to dismantle even our
collective belief that these are things
that a democracy should have or even
that we should have a democracy really.
Can I
complicate the possibility
within the pessimism that you're
identifying or just like realism?
>> The realism.
>> Well, the pract practical practicality I
would say it's practical.
>> The practicalities. It is the way the
country has worked thus far is that you
get these moments of what we can
identify
in hindsight as being these moments of
progress, right?
>> Yes.
>> The Civil War ends in 1865.
Uh you get three amendments 13, 14, 15
in the wake. You
have I mean I don't know when you would
say reconstruction
begins and ends but you have about 10 10
to a dozen years of of of this moment of
of possibility that you know in order to
get it underway and to have some buy in
from the former Confederate states you
know poor people poor white people have
to be brought along. It seems to me like
every moment in 2020 felt this way too.
Once there's a moment
of white people, black people, poor
people, poor black people, poor white
people, poor black people coming
together once they're getting educated
alongside each other, once there is this
like an kind of equality at the bottom.
You know, Martin Luther King, one of his
last
events before his assassination was the
poor people's campaign,
and that was for everybody, for all poor
people. And I don't know what it looks
like on the other side of this moment,
but I definitely think that one of the
powers of 2020 in part because of the
work of the project was it it brought
people
newly together and gave them new
knowledge. And there's something about
learning alongside each other that is
just really ter, you know, white people
and black people learning alongside each
other that is really terrifying.
>> One, let let me just start by saying
uh elite white people don't care too
much about poor white people either.
>> Sure.
>> Okay.
>> Sure. And we know this because one, we
know again historically if you go all
the way back to the Bacon Rebellion,
Bacon's Rebellion, right, when unfree
white people who were indentured uh
working in deplorable conditions aligned
with enslaved black people because they
were all poor, unfree laborers, and they
rose up in rebellion against the landed
white gentry. and the landed white
gentry's response to that understanding
the sheer numeric power of people who
were unfree no matter their race and
that their common cause was their
economic and political status. They gave
poor white people something that money
could not buy and they gave them
whiteness.
>> And so they literally created uh
different political rules for white
people. They gave the vote um to uh some
white men who didn't own land and they
created laws that you know no matter how
poor you were,
you had certain innate rights over
anybody who was black, no matter what,
slave or or or free. And that sense has
been used again and again and again to
crush any hope of of a class-based
movement in the United States. So during
reconstruction, as you say, the only way
we can get the Freeman's Bureau and uh a
an attempt to try to help people who had
just been enslaved yesterday was to say,
"Well, what about poor white people?"
But what happens? So black and black
people start schools. There's Freeman's
Bureau Schools, and those schools are
integrated because poor white people in
the South also did not have education,
>> right?
>> There were no public schools in the
South except for in North Carolina. And
black folks coming out of slavery want
to build public schools for all
children. And so you have small numbers
of white children attending these these
Freedman Bureau schools. And you know
what happens? The poor white people are
like, "We're too good to be going to
school with these black folks.
>> They did not have any schools,
>> but now they wanted segregated schools."
And so we see this again and again. You
see this in in um the end of
reconstruction
um where there are white sharecroers.
Most of the land and wealth is held in
the hand of a very small number of of
rich landed white people. And yet, who
are the alliances between, right? White
people are abandoning their class
interest for their racial interest. When
Dr. King decides to do the poor people's
m march, that is strategy.
>> Well, yeah, he knows.
>> He realizes he has gone as far as he can
go with getting white support for black
people simply obtaining their rights.
that he has to try to build uh this
class-based movement. And so when we
look now at, you know, what what what
were people asking for out of 2020? Yes,
they were asking for racial equity, but
they were also asking for a livable
wage, right? They were also asking for
the end of mass incarceration, which
wraps up, you know, the majority of
people in prison are not black. Black
people are disproportionately
incarcerated, but we are not the
majority of people who are in prison.
universal health care. Most people who
don't have insurance are not black,
right? Most people who use Medicare,
Medicaid, food stamps, not black. And
yet you have people voting, the majority
of white Americans voting for a
political party that is denying those
things that they actually benefit from.
And they
>> right now,
>> right now, right? And so we have to
understand that when when we when we say
all the time, oh, white Americans, poor
white Americans are voting against their
own interests. That's because we don't
understand the interest,
>> right?
>> Whiteness is its own wage,
>> right? So, I might not have anything
else, but I have this. So, even now when
we're talking about uh cuts to Medicaid,
cuts to, you know, this lifesaving
health care program. You have people
saying, "Well, we need to make sure they
know it's not just black people on it."
But the problem with that sentiment is
we act like we don't understand that the
folks in power don't actually care about
poor white people that much either. So
simply pointing out that it's also poor
white people who are going to be hurt is
not going to move the needle. I have
read reports from you know during the
time of desegregation after Brown v.
Board and the rich white elite said
we're going to shut down the high
schools. We're going to shut down all
the schools instead of letting two black
kids come into this white school. Now,
the poor white kids didn't have another
option, right?
>> And you know what they said? They said,
"Now, we know it's going to hurt a
significant number of our poor white
population not to have a public school,
but it's okay cuz it's going to hurt all
the black people."
>> Yeah.
>> They literally wrote that down. So, this
is that that
class solidarity,
that crossracial class solidarity
does not exist for long. Mhm.
>> And you have a political party that is
able to exploit that even now. So when
we look at, you know, apparently Trump
won on his economic agenda, right?
>> That's what they said.
>> That's what they said. And yet what does
he roll out as soon as he gets in
office? He rolls out a racial agenda.
That's that's what he rolls out. Doesn't
come out with a single economic policy
to help low-income people at all. and
yet support remains the same.
>> I'm wondering what it is like to have
written
>> the essay that you wrote for the
original project.
>> I would say one of the beautiful things
about that 1619 essay was that it felt
like you were risking hope
>> and making this identification with your
father
>> who was born into this family of
Mississippi sharecroers who raised you
in a redlinined neighborhood in Iowa.
But you write about how your father also
proudly flew an American flag and his
belief in this country and what the flag
meant and it confused you as an
adolescent and you did not understand
why it might be the most optimistic
thing
>> that I've ever written.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> And I think your identification of an op
>> I would not write that essay today. So
when I think about the original essay
and
you know what I was trying to do in both
its opening talking about my father with
this flag and the way black people have
always tried to use this American flag
and and laying claim to a lineage and
and and a just the you know it it
shouldn't feel radical but just to be
able as a black person to say this is my
country. I have a right to fly this
flag. I would want, not me personally,
to fly the flag, but that just people
who have no literally no other country
to claim, being able to
>> have some pride in in claiming that
country uh was wildly optimistic and I
and I think you know and and you know
this as writers,
not just simply as reporters, we're
writers. you are rhetorically trying to
bring people to a certain place and and
and you're very conscious rhetorically
of where you're trying to bring bring
people and I was trying to call
us into possibility,
>> black Americans into possibility to say,
>> you know, you are American. Your
ancestors did build this and not just
with their brute labor. This country
could not exist without us and you can
take pride in that and it's okay. but
also call white people into possibility
to say this country can be better than
what it is. That we were founded on
these majestic ideas even if those men
who wrote them didn't necessarily
believe they applied to everyone. They
did write them and they gave us the
ability then to to take those words and
say those those words can be manifested.
And now it's like I I feel like um to
some degree
what it must have felt like. Okay, this
is going to sound absolutely crazy, so
don't take it literally. Um
>> you know me though.
>> No, I'm talking I'm talking about to the
the listening public.
Thug Marshall. Okay, I'm not I am not
comparing myself to Thuga Marshall. But
one of the things that I obsess over and
I have obsessed over for probably two
decades is what it must have felt like
to be thug Marshall serving on the
Supreme Court. So Thug Marshall uh is as
much an architect of our democracy as
anyone can be. Yes. Right. And and you
you go before the Supreme Court and you
bring the case that dismantles
ultimately dismantles racial aparttheid
in the United States, Brown v. Board of
Education. And then within a few years
of helping end racial apartheid in the
United States, you go on to that very
court and you will spend your entire
career writing dissents.
>> Mhm.
>> Against a court that is erasing your
legacy.
>> Yep.
>> Right. And I, you know, we we we
have two justices now that are historic
justices who are also writing descents,
but they weren't coming from actually
having created the legal possibility
>> to like watching the legacy just be
dismantled by your peers
>> like your own court cases, right? Your
your own, right? And so I feel like I I
wrote this this thing and I I helped
bring this thing into the world that was
really about possibility of saying if we
can finally be truthful about who we are
and if we actually believe in these
creeds owning up means we can then
create this country. Now, I'm not saying
I ever thought we were going to, but I
was trying to call us into a
possibility. Like that flag, my dad with
that American flag was disarming also
for many white people. And I understand
that rhetorically as I'm writing it that
I'm messaging on
>> two levels here. I'm messaging to black
people, but I'm definitely me messaging
to white people who can see themselves
and their love of country and patriotism
in my dad
>> right
>> in this black man flying this flag. And
that flag allows them to do that. And
now we are in this moment um where
everything has been placed back in its
rightful place.
And I don't even think it's it's you
know the MAGA aesthetic. I I think those
folks were just waiting for a moment and
that moment is now. I think it's all the
quiet people.
>> Yeah. who aren't signaling anything
aesthetically, politically, they're just
quiet.
>> And they're quiet because really they
agree.
>> Not to the extremes,
>> right? But it's it's the people who were
like, "We did believe Black Lives
Matter, but you know what? You made me
sit into one too many trainings and I'm
tired of you talking about race all the
time. Like, I thought you were going to
talk about it for a few months. We gave
you DEI. Now you keep talking about it."
It's not just that we can't talk about
these things like in a in a way like u
>> this is a good point
>> where socially it's not acceptable. It's
that we have a president who is issuing
executive orders saying you cannot talk
about these things saying you cannot
have multicultural centers, you cannot
have diversity and inclusion officers on
campus. You cannot say we actually want
to make something racially diverse
because that is discriminatory against
white people. It's that we literally are
being told legally that we can't and
there has not been a push back to that.
There have not been people who said
actually diversity is our value and so
that willing abandonment.
>> But see this to me
>> I'm in descent writing mode. That's all
I'm saying.
>> Okay. I
>> that's my I I I fear
sadly the rest of my career
>> is going to be in descent writing mode.
I want to sort of spend a second reading
between the lines of what it means for
you to be in descent writing mode
because
>> you compared yourself to being in a
situation that that a th good marshall
well actually literally only Thood
Marshall could have experienced, right?
which is essentially being
having gone to the court in 1954, gotten
your verdict that would result in Brown
versus Board of Education
>> ruling.
>> The ruling, sorry. And then having the
the most amazing thing happen. You get
appointed to sit on the court and you
have to spend most of your time on the
court
objecting in descent to the rulings of
your colleagues
>> that by the way are often citing Brown v
board as they
>> yes as
>> dismantle it
>> I mean but also I'm experiencing as a
reader the work you are doing now as
descent work. I don't think I needed you
to crystallize it, but you did a much
better job of it than I did or I could
have.
>> You know, I I think about um you know,
what is the role of descent like when
when you're reading
>> any descent or you're talking about the
sort of the credential descent? Okay.
>> Yeah. Right. What is the purpose of
that? um when we look at a Sonia Soto
Sotomayor or Justice uh Brown Jackson
and and on you know you're a 63 minority
on the court so their their entire
career going to be writing descents as
well and I think about my my own work
and this this feeling like I will you
know go out I will end my career writing
descent that that is that is my future
and you you understand that you're
writing for a future future society.
>> Mhm.
>> Archives are not about today. Descents
are writing for a future society that
will take that descent that will be
ready for that descent and and enact it.
I mean, this is what overturns uh pie v.
Ferguson in 1954
>> was descent. John Marshall Harlland's
descent and pie is ultimately used
as the basis, the legal basis to
overturn segregation in Brown. And so I
I think I'm also
um just in the bearing witness stage
>> that I feel a mandate
to bear witness, to not allow us when we
look back 20 years from now, 30 years
from now to pretend we didn't know,
>> to pretend that we weren't actively
making choices. Um
I I see what's happening now as a
foreclosure of possibility. I think that
is where we are.
>> Like I I have been on the road
constantly since um 1619 published,
right? talking about 1619 in every type
of place, urban areas with lots of uh
black and brown people, multi-racial
audiences, and completely white places
where people wanted to come out and
grapple with something really hard. And
now we're at a place where
college campuses can't even invite me or
others who are doing similar work. They
can't even invite you on campus. You
cannot even have that discussion on
campus.
>> Is this a nationwide I mean is this like
particular kinds of universities or are
you noticing there's just been a real
change in
>> No, it's there is a fear
um you know so no court and no law has
ever said that DEI or diversity, equity,
inclusion or working on diversity is
illegal. It is not illegal. It doesn't
have to be right because all you have to
have is the threat that your university
will be harmed, your organization will
be targeted, you may be sued. You have
the Justice Department, the Department
of Education, and the President of the
United States saying that this is
illegal
and discriminatory and in violation of
civil rights law. The point of that is
that you don't actually have to force
compliance.
>> Right.
>> Right. It's chilling.
>> People comply in advance. So, I have
talked to
um a lot of like writer friends and
historians and just said, "Are people
asking you to come talk to their
students anymore?" And many of them say
no. I just got a call from a reporter in
South Carolina because uh some staff at
um Fort Sumpter and another historic
site, Fort Sumpter, right, the first
shot of the Civil War. my children's
book has been flagged,
>> right, uh, for removal. And so
>> the very ideas that we were able to talk
about and discuss and have exchange
about are now considered
>> sis dot essentially.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> In a society that has prided itself on
being open on freedom of speech, freedom
right of expression, freedom of
assembly. And again, this is not
happening because college students are
using their freedom of speech to protest
something, but because the most powerful
people in the world have dictated and
made it so. And all of these
institutions who 5 years ago pretended
that all of this was so important to
them um have have capitulated.
>> Where would you say we are right now?
Because I've been thinking a lot about
what history is even good for right now.
Because what it does is it tricks you
into looking for these compares and
contrasts when really I actually think
it might be more useful to do something
that I think I'm hearing you say, which
is to just be present, right? And just
see what is happening because history as
a precedent.
I mean, I don't know if it's useful.
>> Don't ever say you don't know if history
is useful.
>> Well, I'm saying in terms of figuring
out where we currently are. Of course,
there's a use of it for history. I think
that's there's no question about that.
>> I think it does though. What I think
what I think
>> maybe
>> go ahead.
>> I I think maybe talk about what a proper
use of history is then.
>> I think um I mean there's lots of them
but but the the the two things I would
focus on for helping us in this moment
is one it helps us understand what we
are capable of.
>> Okay.
>> And I think that's really important. So,
you know, in my my latest piece for the
magazine, I try to show us about
historically where I feel like we are,
which is
>> where you go through and you look at all
the things that the Trump administration
has essentially undone.
>> Yes.
>> In the form of executive orders and you
know the
like the destruction of these programs
and and rolling back these policies,
>> right? So, it's like a policy feels very
abstract. an executive order feels very
abstract and we suffer from um
historical naive in this country and
denialism and that's because we really
do believe in our mythology
>> in a way. I mean, all countries have
mythology, but we really do believe
we're exceptional,
>> and we really do treat all of these dark
extended periods where people don't have
rights, uh, where people are having
their rights violently suppressed, where
we don't have democracy. We treat them
as these exceptional periods as opposed
to the norm. And so I wanted to show
like there was a time when
there was a integrated university in the
south where black and white children
were attending this school together in
Louisiana where we had black senators
like a few years out of slavery black
men were serving in Congress, black
people were serving in the federal
government and that progress was
completely erased within 15 years.
>> You have none of that. And I think
because we don't know what we are
capable of, we can't imagine
what can happen in this period. So when
I'm writing, you know, it it's not just
abstract all of these executive orders
and all of this pressure that's being
placed on the private sector, on public
institutions, on universities to end DEI
to open their books and show and justify
every black person that's been hired or
every black person who's been admitted.
It's not abstract, right? You can see a
disappearance of us from these places
because we have seen a disappearance
before. And I think the other reason,
you know, what history can do for us is
it also can show us a road map out. So
what I'm arguing is like the our
coralate now
is about 1913 1920s
>> where we had this period of forward
progress.
It collapses.
>> This is the nater.
>> What ends reconstruction is a deal
>> between the northern industrialist
titans
>> and the white former confederates.
Now whether those northern titans hated
black people or not, some did.
It was irrelevant.
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> There's this great book called Race and
Reunion. Is David Blake.
>> David Blight. Okay. Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> And he talks about, you know, that
weariness of of white people right after
the Civil War of grappling with the race
problem. They're tired of it. They're
over it and they just want to be friends
again. and they were fighting over race
and now they just want to be friends
again. And the way that they can reunite
and be friends again is they got to let
black people go,
>> right? Do do what you want to them.
We're not even going to fight about them
anymore. There was a silence and an
acquiescence. Dealing with that original
sin is too hard. It's exhausting. It's
draining. You're making me feel things
that I don't want to feel. And I just
want to think about how great America
is. And I just want to be clean and have
clean hands. So, we just got to move on
and let that race stuff go.
>> Um, and black people need to be quiet.
Well, with that in mind, uh I really I
mean I think that there is something
I don't know potentially confusing about
what it means to have as an as a
descendant of slavery
the split screen
of institutional
narratives. And I'm thinking
specifically about what it is like for
me
>> to walk around this city and go to all
these museums and to have every single
museum in New York City right now have
some major show about some great like
featuring some great black artist. The
Met right now has not only a Lorna
Simpson show that is very good, but they
have the Super Fine show, but that the
the Costume Institute is putting on
about, you know, 350 years of black
people in clothes. Amy Charles at the
Whitney. Uh Jack Whitten was at MoMA.
Rashid Johnson basically has colonized
the the lobby at the the Guggenheim.
>> Can I just say something really quick
though? I I do just think when when
we're commenting on how black all these
exhibits are.
>> Oh yes, please speak.
>> We just have to acknowledge exhibits are
planned years in advance.
>> Okay. Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> So let's see what we see next year.
>> So I actually think this is a great
>> we give too much credit.
>> I'm not giving Well, the credit this is
not a question of credit. This is just a
question of reality. Right. These shows
are happening. These shows are in a
response to this is George Floyd.
>> That's right.
>> These shows are George Floyd.
>> That's right. I mean I should have said
that but
>> witness test will be what what
>> what comes in its wake what happens
after but I mean the reason to bring
them up though is
>> like is this are are we in the moment of
the veil coming down right and is this
the moment where we mark y'all remember
in 2025 when all the museums and then
>> right that this is like I think about
and I'm not going to remember his name
right now but like the very last repres
represent black representative of
Congress. I think he gets uh booted in
1898 or something like that, right? And
he gives this amazing speech and he's
like, I'm leaving. I'm the last one, but
one day we will return.
>> It would take almost a century.
>> Mhm.
>> Right. So I I almost feel like when we I
feel sad. Mhm.
>> I feel a deep sadness that what you are
seeing and the ability to go to all
these museums that it's going to be some
years before we see that again. Like
that that's the last little remnant of
this brief moment.
>> That moment of
>> in time,
>> that reconstruction flavored moment.
Yeah. Yeah.
>> That that W boys talked about comes
down.
>> Nicole,
thanks for hanging out and doing a
little cannonballing with us. I
appreciate it.
>> Why is it called Cannonball?
>> Because, okay, it's a long story, but
basically just go with the energy. We
did it.
>> Okay.
>> I'm scared.
>> War of what?
>> I don't know what the hell I said.
>> You You said it all.
>> Right. Exactly.
[Music]